In an earlier topic,
we briefly touched on Structured Query Language or SQL.
SQL is the primary interface used to interact with relational databases.
SQL is a declarative domain specific language that
is purposefully designed for managing data held in a relational database.
Let's break that definition down.
What does declarative mean?
Declarative languages describe the desired results,
but don't explicitly list commands or
steps that must be performed to achieve those results.
Before I delve deeper into the term declarative,
let's see how a typical programming language works.
In an imperative language like Java,
lets say if you need to read 10 lines of text from a file,
you will write code to open a file handle,
then use an iterator that reads 10 lines using that file handle,
then close the file handle.
See that you're specifying all the steps that need to be performed to
achieve your desired result which is read 10 lines from a file.
In SQL, if you want to read ten rows from a table,
you simply provide your intention in the form of a statement like this. That's it.
The Database figures out the best steps to
get the 10 rows from the table and returns it to you.
Simple, right? Let's look at the other term.
Domain-specific that was in the definition.
SQL is not a general purpose programming language.
Meaning you can't use SQL to build a web or mobile applications.
It is designed for one purpose and one purpose only.
That is, to interact with a relational database.